PEP 692: Introduce proposed enhancements and expand Motivation section (#2732)
python/peps: pep-0692.rst

Title: Using TypedDict for more precise \*\*kwargs typing
Author: Franek Magiera <framagie@gmail.com>
Sponsor: Jelle Zijlstra <jelle.zijlstra@gmail.com>
Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-692-using-typeddict-for-more-precise-kwargs-typing/17314
Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Content-Type: text/x-rst
Created: 29-May-2022
Python-Version: 3.12

> Post-History: `12-Jul-2022 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-692-using-typeddict-for-more-precise-kwargs-typing/17314>`__,
>               `12-Jul-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/PLCNW2XR4OOKAKHEZQM7R2AYVYUXPZGW/>`__,
>               `29-May-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/thread/U42MJE6QZYWPVIFHJIGIT7OE52ZGIQV3/>`__

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Post-History: `29-May-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/typing-sig@python.org/thread/U42MJE6QZYWPVIFHJIGIT7OE52ZGIQV3/>`__,
              `12-Jul-2022 <https://mail.python.org/archives/list/python-dev@python.org/thread/PLCNW2XR4OOKAKHEZQM7R2AYVYUXPZGW/>`__,
              `12-Jul-2022 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pep-692-using-typeddict-for-more-precise-kwargs-typing/17314>`__,
```

Thanks for updating these headers—just FYI, older threads go first.

already existing codebases where the need of refactoring the code in order to
introduce proper type annotations may be considered not worth the effort. This
in turn prevents the project from getting all of the benefits that type hinting
can provide.

Moreover, one pattern that ``**kwargs`` are especially useful for is when a
function should accommodate optional keyword-only arguments that don't have

> default values. A need for a pattern like that can arise when values that are

Reviewer 2: I find this a particularly weak argument -- optional keyword args without defaults seems an obscure edge case, and marker objects usually work just fine. Even if there are real-world examples of this need (as you show below), I don't think it's worth nearly 50 lines of text in the PEP.

Reviewer: For what its worth, as a random datapoint from a random Python user, I don't think I've ever seen this pattern in real life—I'm sure it happens, but "especially useful" seems like it might be overstating it and this might be more helpful nearer the end of the section, particularly considering the utility of the other two (I see them absolutely everywhere).

Author: That makes sense, I deleted the detailed example and just linked the httpx issue. Also, moved the paragraphs around and changed the "especially useful" bit to "also convenient".

authorization strategy should be used at all, and the same could be true for
``timeout``. In this situation there are no obvious default values for those
parameters.

This example is based on real world use cases taken from popular `httpx
<httpxSentinel_>`__ and `urllib3 <urllib3Sentinel_>`__ libraries. Those
libraries deal with this problem by introducing sentinel objects that are used
as defaults. One issue of such a solution is that if the clients subclass a
class that is part of a public API and want to override the ``request`` method,
they may need to import that sentinel object, which usually should not be made
public. Using ``**kwargs`` in this example would not have this problem and is
arguably simpler. However, currently there is no way to properly type hint such
a solution.

In addition, ``**kwargs`` can be used to reduce the amount of code needed in
cases when there is a top-level method that is a part of a public API and it
calls a bunch of helper functions, all of which expect the same keyword
arguments. Unfortunately, if those helper functions were to use ``**kwargs``,
there is no way to properly type hint them if the keyword arguments they expect

> are of different types.

Reviewer 2: This strikes me as the main use case -- the need to avoid repetition when one function calls another with an identical signature. Maybe you could elaborate more on how frequent this pattern is? I've encountered it enough to think it's quite often -- e.g. I recall writing many wrappers for `open()` that were a pain to write. I've also seen real bugs reported that were due to such a situation where the helper was updated to accept a new keyword and the wrapper wasn't.

(The other legit use case is adding type annotations to a legacy code base that uses `**kwargs` wrappers a lot -- I agree with what you wrote at the top of the Motivation section about exceeding the time budget for the migration.)

As described in the :ref:`Intended Usage <pep-692-intended-usage>` section,
using ``**kwargs`` is not always the best tool for the job, but still it is a
widely used pattern. As a consequence, there has been a
`lot of discussion <mypyIssue4441_>`__ around supporting more precise
``**kwargs`` typing and it became a feature that would be valuable for a large

> part of the Python community.

Reviewer 2: This paragraph is kind of hanging here by itself. Maybe it needs to be made part of the Introduction instead?

Author: Moved it so it appears earlier in the Motivation section - without a detailed example of "facilitating optional keyword arguments that don't have default values" I think it is a nice transition from the previous two paragraphs.

are of different types. In addition, even if the keyword arguments are of the
same type, there is no way to check whether the function is being called with
keyword names that it actually expects.

As described in the :ref:`Intended Usage <pep-692-intended-usage>` section,
using ``**kwargs`` is not always the best tool for the job. Despite that, it is
still a widely used pattern. As a consequence, there has been a lot of
discussion around supporting more precise ``**kwargs`` typing and it became a
feature that would be valuable for a large part of the Python community. This
is best illustrated by the `mypy GitHub issue 4441 <mypyIssue4441_>`__ which
contains a lot of real world cases that could benefit from this propsal.

One more use case worth mentioning for which ``**kwargs`` are also convenient,
is when a function should accommodate optional keyword-only arguments that
don't have default values. A need for a pattern like that can arise when values
that are usually used as defaults to indicate no user input, such as ``None``,
can be passed in by a user and should result in a valid, non-default behavior.

> A part of a popular httpx library can serve as an `example <httpxIssue1384_>`__
> where an issue like this may come up.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, this issue `came up <httpxIssue1384_>`__ in the popular ``httpx`` library.
```

in turn prevents the project from getting all of the benefits that type hinting
can provide.

Moreover, ``**kwargs`` can be used to reduce the amount of code needed in
cases when there is a top-level function that is a part of a public API and it
calls a bunch of helper functions, all of which expect the same keyword
arguments. Unfortunately, if those helper functions were to use ``**kwargs``,
there is no way to properly type hint them if the keyword arguments they expect
are of different types. However, even if the keyword arguments are of the same
type, there is no way to check if the function is being called with keyword
names that it actually expects. All of this makes certain issues difficult to
spot. For example, a helper function could be updated to take account of a new
keyword argument, but the public function which uses the helper may not have it

> in its signature.

Reviewer 2: I've got a feeling that there's an even shorter paragraph trying to come forward here. The key issue is that if we have e.g. `xmlopen(file, mode)` calling the builtin `open(file, mode)`, and `open()` grows a new feature (say, `bufsize=...`), we might want to be warned that `xmlopen()` also needs to be updated to add that feature. Unfortunately, if the solution us that `open()` should be declared using `(**kwds: **SomeTypeDict)`, I'm not convinced that this is altogether an improvement -- inside `open()` it's harder to access the arguments (`kwargs["filename"]` instead of just `filename`) and for the human reader the true signature is farther removed from the function definition.

Author: That makes sense, I agree that in the example that you're mentioning here there is no advantage to using `**kwargs` (btw, feels like it'd be quite hard to come up with an elegant solution to that). The situation I had in mind was that for example a helper which already uses `**kwargs` in its signature gets updated to deal with a new keyword (it uses `kwagrs["new_keyword"]` in its body), but a function that calls the helper doesn't take that into account - I guess the earlier paragraph would fit this example better. But anyway I've removed it altogether as it seems to be a well known use case for which static typing is helpful and it seems to me now that there is no point to highlight this one particular advantage.

A ``TypedDict`` that is used to type ``**kwargs`` could potentially contain
keys that are already defined in the function's signature. If the duplicate
name is a standard parameter, an error should be reported by type checkers.

> If the duplicate name is a positional only parameter, no errors should be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the duplicate name is a positional-only parameter, no errors should be
```

Intended Usage
--------------

> The intended use cases for this proposal are described in the :ref:`Motivation
> <pep-692-motivation>` section. In summary, more precise ``**kwargs`` typing

Reviewer: FYI, you can just do

```suggestion
The intended use cases for this proposal are described in the
:ref:`pep-692-motivation` section. In summary, more precise ``**kwargs`` typing
```

and the section name will be included as the reference text.

require refactoring and function body and function invocations could be
appropriately type checked.

Moreover, using ``**kwargs`` with more precise type hinting would allow for
less code and less copy pasting in cases when a module contains a bunch of
functions that expect similar keyword arguments. Using ``**kwargs`` with a
``TypedDict`` as propsed in this PEP is much more concise than explicitly
repeating the keyword arguments every time. 

Another useful pattern that justifies using and typing ``**kwargs`` as proposed
is when the function's API should allow for optional keyword arguments that
don't have default values.

> 

Reviewer 2: I know you just moved this paragraph -- but it's also added to the Motivation section. Why the duplication?

Author: That's a good point, I reworked the "Intended Usage" section so that the examples detailed in the "Motivation" section are not repeated - there is only a short summary of those to make the transition to "better tools for the job" paragraph smoother.

    >>> def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...
    ...
    >>> foo.__annotations__
    {'kwargs': Unpack[Movie]}

To accomplish this, we propose a new dunder called ``__typing_kwargs_unpack__``.
The double asterisk syntax should result in a call to the
``__typing_kwargs_unpack__`` special method on an object it was used on.
This means that at runtime, ``def foo(**kwargs: **T): ...`` is equivalent to

> ``def foo(**kwargs: T.__typing_kwargs_unpack__()): ...``.

Reviewer 4: Is this meant literally (call the method on the type instance), or as a shortcut for normal Python calling of magic methods which is `type(T).__typing_kwargs_unpack(T)` ?

Author: I meant this literally - wasn't aware that python calls magic methods as you've described. Do you think it would make sense to change this description? To me it seems that for simplicity it could be left as is.

Reviewer 4: The audience for a PEP is implementors, so being precise and unambiguous is usually better.

Reference for special method lookup: https://docs.python.org/3/reference/datamodel.html#special-method-names

Author: Thanks

To accomplish this, we propose a new dunder called ``__typing_kwargs_unpack__``.
The double asterisk syntax should result in a call to the
``__typing_kwargs_unpack__`` special method on an object it was used on.
This means that at runtime, ``def foo(**kwargs: **T): ...`` is equivalent to
``def foo(**kwargs: T.__typing_kwargs_unpack__()): ...``.
``TypedDict`` is the only type in the standard library that is expected to

> implement ``__typing_kwargs_unpack__``, which should return ``Unpack[self]``.

Reviewer 2: This also feels like needless duplication.

Author: Kept this sentence here and removed it from the Abstract instead - in my opinion it fits this section better (there's more context around introducing a new dunder) and for abstracts I like to include as little detail as possible.

    >>> def foo(**kwargs: **Movie): ...
    ...
    >>> foo.__annotations__
    {'kwargs': Unpack[Movie]}

To accomplish this, we propose a new dunder called ``__typing_kwargs_unpack__``.
The double asterisk syntax should result in a call to the
``__typing_kwargs_unpack__`` special method on an object it was used on.

> This means that ``def foo(**kwargs: **T): ...`` is equivalent to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means that at runtime, ``def foo(**kwargs: **T): ...`` is equivalent to
```
Because it isn't the same to static type checkers, presumably.

``def foo(**kwargs: T.__typing_kwargs_unpack__()): ...``.
``TypedDict`` is the only type in the standard library that will implement

> ``__typing_kwargs_unpack`` and it should return ``Unpack[self]``.

Reviewer 2: I'd make this less strong -- I don't want the PEP to read as forbidding to implement that dunder on other types if the need arises. It should be phrased as an expectation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``TypedDict`` is the only type in the standard library that will implement
``__typing_kwargs_unpack__`` and it should return ``Unpack[self]``.
```

Its also not a dunder at all here, due to a typo
